# mls-roster-construction-considerations
Statistical analysis of 2022 Major League Soccer player performance data with the goal of identifying trends and relevant factors in roster construction.

Background, Motivations, and Data Source:
Major League Soccer, the first division in United States and Canadian professional soccer, has grown from 20 teams in 2015 to 30 teams by the start of the 2025 season. This rapid expansion, cheered on by ever-growing fan groups, has coincided with a 20% increase in international players between 2012 and 2022, with 82+ nations now represented. Out of the international players, over 50% of them came from countries in Latin America. 
The MLS has a cap on roster spots for international players and financial incentives in place for teams that sign domestic players. Because of these factors MLS teams need to be intentional in their efforts to acquire and compensate international talent while finding the most beneficial ways to capitalize on domestic player subsidies. Looking at the relationships between player performance and nationality, especially in the Americas, will provide relevant insight into deficits and successes in domestic player development as well as a better understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of the international talent pool. These findings could be applied to scouting efforts and assist in improving pre-professional and youth league training.
This work explores the relationships between player age, nationality, performance, and salary through exploratory analysis and data visualization. Team and player performance statistics were obtained from Football Reference (fbref.com) and MLS salary data came from Transfermarkt (transfermarkt.com).
The data was accessed using the R package ‘worldfootballR’ created and maintained by Jase Ziv. The player performance data included 29 variables such as goals scored, successful tackles, and annual salary. 

Discussion of Results: 
Latin America (particularly South America) is known for their world-class offensive soccer abilities and that reputation was shown to be well-deserved when Latin American player abilities were compared to those from the US and Canada. What was particularly interesting from the visualization in Figure 2 is that these two groups are nearly indistinguishable in terms of their defensive performance. This suggests players from the US and Canada are not fundamentally lacking in skill, but that perhaps the way that offense is taught in North America is significantly less effective than the Latin American coaching strategies. If the United States and Canada want to improve the development of young players, identifying the unique offensive approaches taken by coaches from Latin America is the first step.
When teams are choosing how to allocate their international roster spots it would be important for them to understand the investigated salary trends. Teams might need to offer a more competitive contract to Latin American attackers and wingers sooner than they would with player from the US and Canada. Identifying these salary trends ahead of time could also help teams anticipate and plan for their future salary allocations prior to contract negotiation.
The discrepancy in pay between young players from the Americas could be attributed to player marketability. Brazil has an international reputation for producing elite players (Neymar, Pelé, Ronaldinho, etc.) so it is not unlikely that this reputation influences how much teams are willing to pay Brazilian players. Teams might be hoping to push ticket sales by acquiring a player with a pre-established reputation and/or banking on the history of Brazilian excellence and investing in a player who hasn’t reached their full potential yet hoping for a future star.
This analysis provides a useful entry point for more in-depth exploration of considerations for roster construction in the MLS; however, it is important to note that this data lacks specific pieces of context such as how different players were obtained, full contract details, advanced analytics, etc. Because of the limited scope, it would be hasty to make decisions based on the trends identified here. Obtaining additional data to explore further and gain a more complete understanding would be necessary prior to applying these findings in a professional setting.
